Hitcher, The (1986)
reviewed by
Mark R. Leeper

[Editor's note: Sites running 2.10 netnews will munge headers of articles in moderated groups *not* named mod.something. If you get my name instead of Mark Leeper's in the "From:" line, please encourage your S.A. and your feed's S.A. to upgrade to 2.11. Thank you. And now, on to our review... -ecl]

                                 THE HITCHER
                       A film review by Mark R. Leeper
                        Copyright 1987 Mark R. Leeper

Capsule review: Boring actioner about a psychotic hitchhiker whom the scriptwriter makes unkillable. Contrived, unbelievable, and ultimately dull thriller is one more film to waste Rutger Hauer.

You want a thriller with lots of mindless action, no logic, and a bunch of fractional-dimensional characters. Cable this month is running what passes for entertainment in some quarters. The film is THE HITCHER and as a friend of mine would say, it sucks pond water. Actually I think this one could turn back a raging river.

Our main character--I don't think we ever get his name so I will call him Poor Schnook--is a teenager driving a car from Chicago to San Diego by way of nearly empty Texas roads. Schnook picks up a psychotic killer played by Rutger Hauer, who adds one more implacable killer to his list of roles. Hauer had better start being more selective in his roles or he will lose the aura he had from SOLDIER OF ORANGE and BLADERUNNER. From the point he gets picked up, Hauer does everything right. He is always in just the right place at the right instant. It is not long before the police think Poor Schnook is the killer and these are not your ordinary police. They have intelligence roughly equivalent to protozoa. In a scene we see only the aftermath of, Hauer has wiped out an entire police station with apparently no more than a knife. In one carefully choreographed scene, with one bullet Hauer knocks out one police helicopter and two police cars whose occupants somehow missed seeing the slowly dropping helicopter fall. The more destruction there is, the more the police want to kill Poor Schnook and the less interested they are in hearing his claims that someone else is responsible.

The plot of the innocent bystander who gets in over his head is standard thriller stuff and can be well done. The innocent bystander against the villain who does everything right is an old one. In a sense THE HITCHER has the same basic (very basic) plot as NORTH BY NORTHWEST but instead of the characters and the wit, THE HITCHER gives us just more mindless action scenes. Perhaps part of the reason audiences are getting more unruly is that in a film like NORTH BY NORTHWEST you want to hear what the characters are saying, while in a film like THE HITCHER it is much less important. And one car engine sounds a lot like another. Rate this one a -2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

                                        Mark R. Leeper
                                        ihnp4!mtgzz!leeper
                                        mtgzz!leeper@rutgers.rutgers.edu
Beyond Therapy (1987)
reviewed by
Steve Fritzinger

                        BEYOND THERAPY
                A film review by Steve Fritzinger
                 Copyright 1987 Steve Fritzinger

Set in the offices of two psychoanalysts, and in a very bad French restaurant, BEYOND THERAPY is a love story about two very confused people.

Bruce (Jeff Goldblum) and Prudence (Julie Haggarty) meet through one of many personal ads Bruce has placed. They have a disastrous lunch, and leave expecting never to see one an other again. Of course, they do meet again.

During the course of their relationship we are introduced to Bruce's homosexual roommate/lover Bob, Bob's "theatrical" mother, Bruce's psychoanalyst, and Prudence's psychoanalyst. A series of bizarre coincidences puts these six people on a collision course with the hilarious climax.

BEYOND THERAPY builds momentum slowly. The first 45 minutes, during which the relationships between the main characters are reveled and expanded, are slow sometimes to the point of being tedious. About half of the people in the audience walked out during this part of the film.

But once all the players are lined up in their domino-like positions, the film delivers a 20-minute punch line worth the wait. When the final push comes, the characters start to fall, and knock each other down with a very satisfying crash.

     I rate it +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Radio Days (1987)
reviewed by
Jeff Meyer

                                RADIO DAYS
                        A film review by Jeff Meyer
                         Copyright 1987 Jeff Meyer

I've been a little lax in getting out movie reviews -- imagine that this is the time to get down to it....

It's been a Woody Allen kinda week. Went and saw RADIO DAYS on Sunday, and then HANNAH AND HER SISTERS (for the second time). I thought HANNAH was probably the best picture I saw last year, and my favorite Allen film (which is taking in a lot of territory). It dispenses a sense of easy good humor among the audience, never pushing it, and presents situations with a sense of familiarity that would be uncomfortable if handled less capably. It has pieces of dialogue that are gut-busters, accentuated by the low-key storyline surrounding them (Max Von Sydow's line about Jesus never fails to make me grin like an idiot). Finally, Allen does something he has yet to do in his previous films: he takes his depressed, if wry, view of life, and gives himself (and those watching his film) an opening at the end of the tunnel -- or at least a tunnel one can live with.

Well, so much for HANNAH -- I babbled glowingly about that last year, and once is enough. I didn't like RADIO DAYS as well, but then, I didn't like anything I saw last year as much as HANNAH, so I guess that's not much of a criticism. Good. RADIO DAYS isn't as easily likable as HANNAH, and it's not going to win the audiences HANNAH did -- but it's as finely crafted (perhaps more so), and satisfying in different ways. While HANNAH celebrates friends and families as an adult, RADIO DAYS is a tribute to nostalgia: nostalgia of the family, nostalgia of the world, and the nostalgia of being a kid. ZELIG and THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO have had touches of this before (and the "short story" quality of those movies is found here, too -- the opening sequence about the burglar winning the "Name That Tune" show from the phone of the house he's broken into), but Allen drenches this film with it. Not surprisingly, though, he knows when to hang it out on the line to let it dry, using a few straying plotlines about himself, various radio characters, and his family to string us along. With someone else (say, oh, I don't know, maybe.... NEIL SIMON?!), this could get cloying very quickly; but Allen managed to turn it around and get me enjoying the film for the same reasons he seemed to enjoy recounting the stories: nostalgia.

When my folks lived in DC during the early 70s, several radio stations were playing old shows every night. My parents hold the same affection for the radio they grew up with (Sky King, I Love a Mystery, The Lone Ranger) as I had for the TV I grew up with (Thunderbirds, StingRay, UFO); they managed to pass that on to me, and I spent a year listening to radio more than I watched TV (I was just past 10 at the time). The Lone Ranger was a favorite -- I always loved how, as LR and Tonto were riding off, some schmoe would step in and ask, "Who was that Masked Man, anyway?" This, of course, gave the poor innocent (usually a widow woman/lone rancher & family/grateful sheriff) the opportunity to say something incredibly profound in tribute about the Masked Rider of the Plains, like "He's the man who's made The West safe for men, women, children, and Mormans alike, and has given Manifest Destiny a good name again, By Golly." We used to laugh at it, but it was always with affection, and I can't help but think that's what Allen is doing here. Wally Shawn makes an unlikely Masked Avenger, but there's a certain thrill when he shouts, "Beware, Evildoers!" -- radio doesn't play through the speaker in the receiver, but in your imagination, and it allows you to create a scenario just complete enough to have some sense of excitement, but private enough that you can laugh at it later. On radio, Adam West's paunch doesn't lap over Batman's utility belt (unless you want it to), and space ships aren't Estes models with sparklers stuck out the back. Allen's bouts with unreality seem a little more logical in a radio world.

It's funny, in retrospect, that Orson Welles name comes up so often in the dialogue of RADIO DAYS. Allen could almost be the Welles of the 80s -- he makes personal, quality films under his complete control, using a small repertory group of actors over and over again (note Tony Roberts is in this one, also -- he seems to be Allen's Talisman, at time. Oh well, whatever works...). A Mercury Theater for the movies. One wonders if he sees the similarities, too. Anyway, Allen continues to produce his yearly snowflake, different from the previous film, and the next film, but with features of both. I hope he goes on making them for a long, long time.

Finally, if the film has done nothing else for me, it's given me something to shout next January 1st, other than "Happy New Year!"...

                                        Moriarty, aka Jeff Meyer
INTERNET:     moriarty@fluke.COM
Manual UUCP:  {uw-beaver, sun, allegra, sb6, lbl-csam}!fluke!moriarty


[Editor's note: Sites running 2.10 netnews will munge headers of
articles in moderated groups *not* named mod.something. If you get my
name instead of Mark Leeper's in the "From:" line, please encourage your
S.A. and your feed's S.A. to upgrade to 2.11. Thank you. And now, on to
our review... -ecl]

                                 THE HITCHER
                       A film review by Mark R. Leeper
                        Copyright 1987 Mark R. Leeper

Capsule review: Boring actioner about a psychotic hitchhiker whom the
scriptwriter makes unkillable. Contrived, unbelievable, and ultimately
dull thriller is one more film to waste Rutger Hauer.

You want a thriller with lots of mindless action, no logic, and a bunch
of fractional-dimensional characters. Cable this month is running what
passes for entertainment in some quarters. The film is THE HITCHER and
as a friend of mine would say, it sucks pond water. Actually I think
this one could turn back a raging river.

Our main character--I don't think we ever get his name so I will call
him Poor Schnook--is a teenager driving a car from Chicago to San Diego
by way of nearly empty Texas roads. Schnook picks up a psychotic killer
played by Rutger Hauer, who adds one more implacable killer to his list
of roles. Hauer had better start being more selective in his roles or he
will lose the aura he had from SOLDIER OF ORANGE and BLADERUNNER. From
the point he gets picked up, Hauer does everything right. He is always
in just the right place at the right instant. It is not long before the
police think Poor Schnook is the killer and these are not your ordinary
police. They have intelligence roughly equivalent to protozoa. In a
scene we see only the aftermath of, Hauer has wiped out an entire police
station with apparently no more than a knife. In one carefully
choreographed scene, with one bullet Hauer knocks out one police
helicopter and two police cars whose occupants somehow missed seeing the
slowly dropping helicopter fall. The more destruction there is, the more
the police want to kill Poor Schnook and the less interested they are in
hearing his claims that someone else is responsible.

The plot of the innocent bystander who gets in over his head is standard
thriller stuff and can be well done. The innocent bystander against the
villain who does everything right is an old one. In a sense THE HITCHER
has the same basic (very basic) plot as NORTH BY NORTHWEST but instead
of the characters and the wit, THE HITCHER gives us just more mindless
action scenes. Perhaps part of the reason audiences are getting more
unruly is that in a film like NORTH BY NORTHWEST you want to hear what
the characters are saying, while in a film like THE HITCHER it is much
less important. And one car engine sounds a lot like another. Rate this
one a -2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

                                        Mark R. Leeper
                                        ihnp4!mtgzz!leeper
                                        mtgzz!leeper@rutgers.rutgers.edu <mailto:mtgzz!leeper@rutgers.rutgers.edu>


Angel Heart (1987)
reviewed by
Clark Quinn

                                ANGEL HEART
                        A film review by Clark Quinn
                         Copyright 1987 Clark Quinn

Believe what you've heard.
Harry Angel has been hired to search for the truth...
Pray he doesn't find it.

Starring: Mickey Rourke, Robert DeNiro, Lisa Bonet, Charlotte Rampling Directed by: Alan Parker Produced by: Alan Marshall and Elliott Kastner Executive Producers: Mario Kassar and Andrew Vajna Screenplay by: Alan Parker From the novel: "Falling Angel" by William Hjortsberg Director of Photography: Michael Seresin

I saw this movie at a special pre-release screening here at UCSD. Before the movie started, there was a trailer stating something to the effect that the version we were seeing was not a finished product, and that color, editing, etc. (I can't remember the rest) may be adjusted. We saw the film Saturday night, the film is being released on Friday. Sidenote: can they really make major changes in that short a time?

The story is set in 1955, and involves a PI, Harry Angel (Mickey Rourke) hired by a mysterious stranger named Louis Cyphre (Robert DeNiro) to find Johnny Favorite, who welshed on a debt he owes Mr. Cyphre. The only information Angel has is that this man is supposed to be in a hospital in upstate New York, unrecovered from a traumatic wartime accident. The plot complicates as Angel tracks his man to New Orleans and encounters voodoo magic, murder, and a surprise ending. Unfortunately, only part-way into the movie I gradually recognized the story as one I had read in a magazine (undoubtedly either culled from the book or expanded into a book at a later date). While I remember feeling that the story was one of the more interesting and eerie that I had read, being privy to the solution of the mystery may have diluted the effect of some of the revelations in the movie. I did try and get an unbiased view of the effect of the pacing by talking to my viewing companion afterward, who was not aware of the story.

For this movie to work, it is important that the questions lead in a tighter and tighter spiral, the tension must mount, the pace quicken. While there can be occasional minor buildups and releases, overall there has to be a heightening sense of mystery and peril. On two of these scores the movie succeeds, and on one I believe it fails. First, the screenplay felt tight; the clues led ominously to the next one, and each one seemed to provide more questions than it answered, right up to the slow realization of the solution. There were a couple of plot holes, but only one truly felt jarring, and, set near the end, it did not detract from the pace. In addition, the cinematography set a tone that properly framed the action. Early on, a mood of foreboding pervades the movie, and the camera succeeds in capturing a seediness in the environs with drab colors and small details. Unfortunately, the pace is uneven. Certain scenes are dragged out for no obvious reason, and several mystery cliches are needlessly added. The worst offense is the seemingly obligatory horror scene that turns out to be a dream. One other time there is a dream sequence that seems unnecessary, but this scene is not so much of a red herring. I hope that if they change the film at all, it is the use of judicious editing to tighten the film and remove or trim the slow spots. In this movie, if you have too much time to think, the film loses. I think this weakness is particularly a shame, since director Alan Parker is taking away from nice work by screenwriter Alan Parker. I do not know what Alan Parker has previously done.

Mickey Rourke does a fine job of making Harry Angel an everyman's PI. Occasionally he seems to fall too far into the nervous school of acting, but his gradual realization of the real story is nicely evoked. Lisa Bonet is striking as the sexy, worldly young voodoo priestess. Robert DeNiro captures the mystery of Louis Cyphre well, but Charlotte Rampling is not given enough leeway to play her part of the fortune-teller debutante girlfriend of the missing man.

There is considerable violence and gore in the movie, perhaps more than necessary. There is also some flesh and sex, but not gratuitously. I especially think the ending twist is highly imaginative. Looking back, I think that a good job was done in translating the feel of the story to the screen. Overall, I would give the movie a high 1 on the Leeper scale of -4 to +4. A better job of editing would give it a solid 2.

-- Clark N. Quinn Institute for Cognitive Science C-015 University of California, San Diego La Jolla, California 92093 (619) 534-5996 (UCSD): (619) 457-1274 (Home) {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp OR clark@nprdc.arpa


Angel Heart (1987)
reviewed by
Mark R. Leeper

                                 ANGEL HEART
                       A film review by Mark R. Leeper
                        Copyright 1987 Mark R. Leeper

          Capsule review:  A hard-boiled detective story and
     something more.  This is a complex film that has some
     interesting things to say about the nature of religion.
     There is a lot more to this film than the hot topic of the
     ten seconds cut from the sex scene.

Harry Angel (played by Mickey Rourke) is a hard-boiled private eye in the Philip Marlowe tradition. He is a little crude, a little rude, and occasionally a little bit dense. His client is Louis Cyphre (played by Robert DeNiro), a recluse with a silver cane, pointed fingernails, and, like a cipher, is something of a mystery to be solved. Cyphre hires Angel to track down Johnny Favorite, a singer who disappeared twelve years earlier in 1943. Angel follows a trail that has been cold for twelve years through Harlem, Poughkeepsie, Coney Island, and soon to New Orleans. The trail will lead from drug addicts to evangelists to voodoo worshipers. Harry will trigger a series of murders of friends of Favorite and will become the prime suspect in some of these murders before he discovers the secret of the disappearance of Favorite.

ANGEL HEART is an interesting variation on the detective stories of the '40s. It is as moody a piece as Raymond Chandler would have written, probably nearly as suspenseful, but it also is a comment on religion. We see gospel evangelists squeezing money from their believers, we see baptisms for a religion whose primary symbol is, as one character describes, a man to a wooden cross, and we see voodoo rituals with slaughtered chickens. Each somehow looks equally ridiculous. I doubt that Raymond Chandler would have ever thought to put comparative religion into one of his stories.

To be perfectly frank, my first reaction was to say that this was just a fair detective story and a little bit more and hence would have given the film a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale. However, thinking back, the full solution of the mystery makes a lot of the film, even some of its settings, seem a lot more interesting. The film has a complexity and makes statements not immediately apparent on first viewing. On consideration, the film does deserve a +2.

Oh, and as for the film having to have ten seconds of Mickey Rourke shaking his buttocks edited out in order to go from an X to an R rating--who cares? That ten seconds has become a major topic of interest about the film. It has little to do with the main thrust of the film. There might not have even been an explicit sex scene if the rating system had not been around. Arguing what an R-rated film should be and what can only be in a X-rated film is like arguing how many angels can dance on the head of a pin. And I guess that brings us back to Angels.

                                        Mark R. Leeper
                                        ihnp4!mtgzz!leeper
                                        mtgzz!leeper@rutgers.rutgers.edu